add linux-party-2019 (#31)
sdslabs/sdslabs.github.com: _posts/2019/2019-09-20-linux-party-experience.md

Now about 'bootloaders', they are programs that fire up your OS on startup.
On a Windows laptop, you would be having the Windows Bootloader installed by default on an EFI partition, you can check this by opening Disk Management from the Start menu.
Now this knowledge will come in useful later on

You may be used to using Windows partition scheme in which one makes different drives like C:, D:, etc but Linux uses a different Partition scheme.

```
/
├── bin
├── boot
├── dev
├── etc
├── home
├── lib
├── lib64
├── lost+found
├── media
├── mnt
├── opt
├── proc
├── root
├── run
├── sbin
├── snap
├── srv
├── sys
├── tmp
├── usr
├── var
```

So what you see above is the list of directories that were in my '/'(pronounced 'root') directory. So instead of providing different drives for segregating data Linux gives a master directory that contains everything and within this, several directories can be allocated separate space on your hard disk so it would be somewhat like a different drive. If you don't give allocate separate space to separate directories then would be sharing root's allocated space by default.

> [This](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HbgzrKJvDRw) is a great video explaining the Linux filesystem in detail and don't worry if a lot of things go over your head, for starters, we are only concerned with /, /home and swap

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[This](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HbgzrKJvDRw) is a great video explaining the Linux filesystem in detail. Don't worry if a lot of things go over your head. For starters, we are only concerned with /, /home and swap.
```

/home is where a user's files are stored(similar to the C:\Users in windows) but you would have to allocate more space than what you might be using in C:\Users because ALL of the user files will be in /home and there would be no other D: or E: drive to store these files

> swap is a 'virtual RAM' that is utilised to extend RAM beyond its physical capacity, with swap memory an 8 GB RAM can 'store' much more data than 8 GB though it would be much slower.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
swap is a 'virtual RAM' that is utilised to extend RAM beyond its physical capacity. With swap memory, an 8 GB RAM can 'store' much more data than 8 GB, though it would be significantly slower.
```

> Now for all this blabbering from our experience a general space ratio of 40:60 between / and /home and having swap as double the size of your RAM is the ideal composition. Also, root requires a minimum of 20 GB for smooth operation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From our experience, a general space ratio of 40:60 between / and /home, and setting swap size to double the size of your RAM is a good composition. If possible, give root more that 20 GB of space apart from the space for /home for smooth operation.
```

## The actual partitioning

> Now we have three cases

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are three cases:
```

* Only SSD or only HDD
* SSD + HDD
* Optane + HDD

> Now for only HDD laptops, the work is pretty straightforward that you have to shrink the required memory which you have calculated previously. 

Reviewer: keep only after HDD or SSD, whatever the case may be. Fix this for all occurences

> Now for only HDD laptops, the work is pretty straightforward that you have to shrink the required memory which you have calculated previously. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now for HDD only laptops, the work is pretty straightforward. Shrink the required memory which you have calculated previously. 
```

> For only SSD the process is the same as only HDD laptops except that you have to shift your SSD from RAID to AHCI using [this](https://support.thinkcritical.com/kb/articles/switch-windows-10-from-raid-ide-to-ahci). Step 5 of the previous link will vary with manufacturer, so explore your BIOS a bit (don't go on changing any random setting!) and you'll be bound to hit it or you can google for "____ RAID to AHCI".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For only SSD the process is the same as only HDD laptops except that you have to shift your SSD from RAID to AHCI using [this](https://support.thinkcritical.com/kb/articles/switch-windows-10-from-raid-ide-to-ahci). Step 5 of the previous link will vary with manufacturer, so explore your BIOS a bit (don't go on changing any random setting!) and you'll be bound to hit it or you can google for "<insert laptop model> RAID to AHCI".
```

> For only SSD the process is the same as only HDD laptops except that you have to shift your SSD from RAID to AHCI using [this](https://support.thinkcritical.com/kb/articles/switch-windows-10-from-raid-ide-to-ahci). Step 5 of the previous link will vary with manufacturer, so explore your BIOS a bit (don't go on changing any random setting!) and you'll be bound to hit it or you can google for "____ RAID to AHCI".

Reviewer: the meaning of hit it is unclear

> For SSD + HDD laptops you would want to keep minimum stuff on SSD as it is generally small. So what should be done in this case is to allocate space for / on the SSD(minimal boot time) and /home on the HDD.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For SSD + HDD laptops, you would want minimize stuff on the SSD as it is generally small. In this case, allocate space for / on the SSD(minimal boot time) and /home on the HDD.
```

For shrinking your Windows drives follow [this guide](https://www.dummies.com/computers/pcs/how-to-shrink-a-hard-drive-volume-in-windows/) for both SSD and HDD

> Optane is rare so first check [this](https://www.intel.in/content/www/in/en/support/articles/000023990/memory-and-storage/intel-optane-memory.html) to determine if you have Optane in use in case you are unsure. Installing Ubuntu on Optane is a bit complex so we won't be going there, use [this](https://support.cyberpowerpc.com/hc/en-us/articles/360014775073-How-do-I-disable-Intel-Optane-)(also Disable Intel Optane memory with Intel RST is enough, no need disable from BIOS!), install ubuntu but remember to keep EXTRA 10 MB unallocated space at the END of your HDD which is required by Optane, other than the memory used by Ubuntu. Then use the previous guide to reenable Optane.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Optane is rare so first check [this](https://www.intel.in/content/www/in/en/support/articles/000023990/memory-and-storage/intel-optane-memory.html) to determine if you have Optane in use in case you are unsure. Installing Ubuntu on Optane is a bit complex so we won't be going there; use [this](https://support.cyberpowerpc.com/hc/en-us/articles/360014775073-How-do-I-disable-Intel-Optane-)(disabling Intel Optane memory with Intel RST is enough, no need disable from BIOS!) and install Ubuntu, but remember to keep an EXTRA 10 MB unallocated space at the END of your HDD which is required by Optane, other than the memory used by Ubuntu. Then use the previous guide to re-enable Optane.
```

> Use [this](https://askubuntu.com/a/521195) to apply the theory you learned. "/dev\*" type of names refer to HDD and "/dev/nvmp\*" refer to SSD.

Reviewer: apply the theory to do what?

> In `Device for boot loader installation` shown in the previous link select your SSD in case you have one or you HDD in other case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In `Device for boot loader installation` shown in the previous link select your SSD in case you have one or your HDD in other case.
```

# GRUB

> Remember the talk about bootloaders? now GRUB is your new bootloader. You would be seeing a black screen with white text in a not-so-appealing font show up after your manufacturer's logo on startup. Here is where you can select your OS using arrow keys.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Remember the talk about bootloaders? Now GRUB is your new bootloader. Upon booting up your PC, you should now be greeted with a black or magenta screen with white text in a not-so-appealing font. Here is where you can select your OS using arrow keys.
```

> In case GRUB is now showing up and you are directly booting into an OS(which will not happen in case you followed the instructions) then the issue can be subjective and your best bet would be to do subjective google searches describing what is happening and we are 99% sure that you will find a solution(trust us we've been there). You can also reach out to us [here](chat.sdslabs.co) and we would love to help you!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case GRUB is now showing up and you are directly booting into an OS(which should not happen if you followed the instructions), the issue can be subjective and your best bet would be to do google searches describing what is happening and you should find a solution(trust us, we've been there too). You can also reach out to us [here](chat.sdslabs.co) and we would love to help!
```

# Graphics Driver Errors

> This is the main issue with most of the laptops that get ubuntu newly installed. A variety of errors are reported in this category. You may even install some OS that provides you graphics drivers pre-installed. We recommend [Pop!_OS](https://system76.com/pop) if you are interested in such an OS, as it is based on Ubuntu, so all terminal interactions remain the same.

Reviewer: Move the popOS wala suggestion at the end

* Black screen on login
* ACPI errors after GRUB
* Corrupted display
and many more...

This is mainly due to Nvidia graphics cards being present on a system and the need to manually install their drivers.

> If you face this issue or if miraculously don't while owning Nvidia graphics card, follow [this](https://itsfoss.com/fix-ubuntu-freezing/)(follow step 1 then step 3 then revert step 1)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you face this issue (or miraculously don't while owning an Nvidia graphics card), follow [this](https://itsfoss.com/fix-ubuntu-freezing/)(follow step 1, then step 3, and then revert to step 1)
```

> Another error that may show up is that Windows entry is not showing up in GRUB and a variety of solutions are available [here](https://askubuntu.com/questions/197868/grub-does-not-detect-windows)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another error that you may encounter is that of Windows entry not showing up in GRUB. A variety of solutions are available [here](https://askubuntu.com/questions/197868/grub-does-not-detect-windows)
```

# Issues after installing Ubuntu

## Touchpad dysfunctional

Mostly a drivers issue, Run this on your terminal-
`sudo apt-get install xserver-xorg-input-synaptics`

## Internal Speakers dysfunctional

Run `alsamixer` in your terminal and using left/right and up/down keys raise all bars to max.
Internal speakers generally do not perform to their maximum ability on Ubuntu but external speakers/headphones work fine.

# Further Exploration?

So you have everything set up and want to know more about the world of this amazing piece of open-source software?

Then check these out-

> [Desktop Environments](https://www.forbes.com/sites/jasonevangelho/2018/09/17/linux-for-beginners-whats-a-desktop-environment/#4f3f2adb1b0a)

Reviewer: Koi better link nahi hai kya? Forbes se vibes acchi nahi aati
